what's up I'm Destin this is smarter
every day you've probably heard of
23andme it's one of these companies
where you spit in the tube and you mail
it off and they do DNA testing and give
you ancestry and health data well here's
the deal they approached me and asked me
if I would make a video on smarter every
day about them and what they do but
there's a problem with that
I'm really fascinated with this
technology like I think this is the
future of medicine imagine a doctor
walking into your room opening a chart
and saying oh well I can't give you this
drug because you're genetically
predisposed to a negative reaction that
is the future of medicine so I really
believe this is important however I
can't do an ad for something this
important and have you the viewer think
that I'm just shilling for a company and
saying what they want me to say because
they're giving me money so I set up the
following terms I said look I'll do this
video if number one I get to ask any
question I want of anybody and I get to
say whatever I want as long as it's true
and they said yes to that and number two
I want access to the labs with my camera
and I want to be able to ask the
scientist questions and they said yes to
that and that never happens that's
awesome and number three I told him I
actually wanted to sponsor the video
which they did so
to their credit 23andme is sponsoring a
transparent video which is a little
scary for them because they have no idea
what I'm gonna say so here we go
let's do this when you get the kit it's
pretty clear how this exchange works
I give up genetic material and I get
health and ancestry data back but that's
scary I don't know what they're gonna do
with my sample I don't know exactly what
I'm giving up when I ask people on
Twitter everybody cited privacy concerns
so just for a second let's pretend that
we can't trust this company we need to
go to an independent third-party expert
that knows exactly what type of
information we're giving up when we spit
in a tube and mail it to 23andme
so when a lot of people think about
Huntsville Alabama they think about this
space industry like the Saturn 5 right
but what you didn't know if you get on
Google Maps and go to 601 genome way
you're gonna see a double helix you can
see from space that is this place no
joke Huntsville Alabama is home to one
of the largest DNA sequencing centers in
the entire world and it's in my hometown
like I see these people at PTA meetings
the HudsonAlpha Institute for
biotechnology is where dr. Neil lamb a
PhD in human genetics works we're
go in here and learn about DNA
sequencing there you kneel
hey I'm Destin nice to meet you nice to
meet you yeah Chris Chris nice to meet
you guys hey how you guys doing you
doing all right welcome to the Institute
yeah thank you this is fancy no actually
I upload stuff to the YouTube channel
here because you have the fastest
internet connection in the city did you
know I did that so we're headed to the
genome sequencing center which is the
all of the sequencing machines that we
have it that's an outfit okay so these
are the sequencers right full DNA
sequences your DNA sequences this is
really the heart of HudsonAlpha these
machines are designed to take an
individual or an organism to sequence
it's broken up into small pieces and the
sequence is T C's team for the entire
genome for the entire gene like how much
data are we talking they're in bytes so
the raw data that comes out of this
machine is about 80 gigabytes of
information for one human Tina okay this
explains why the fastest internet node
in the city is it HudsonAlpha that is
correct just 23andme have like a bank of
machines like this 23andme uses a
completely different technology for
genotyping so what's the difference in
genotyping and full-blown DNA sequencing
so to answer that question let me show
you another illustration this is a
representation of your genome there's a
hundred notebooks on the bookshelf and I
want you to imagine that each of those
notebooks has 5000 double-sided pages
full of nothing but DNA sequence adenine
cytosine thymine guanine exactly right
so you've got two copies that copy you
inherited from your mom and the copy you
inherited from your dad okay so this is
a representation of one of those two
copies the amount of information that
you're gonna get from 23andme is not all
three billion bits of information okay
instead it's more like about 90 pages
really think now what's the difference
in genotyping and just doing a DNA
sequence what's the difference in those
two things I'm reading through every
single letter in your genome with
genotyping I'm going to a specific place
and I'm saying at this one site
what do you have and with genotyping I'm
doing that well for 23andme they're
doing that at about 600,000 sites across
your genome so it's not like you're
given away your entire DNA sequence when
you do something like this that's right
you're only giving away a tiny fraction
of your genetic information when you do
something like 23andme okay got it
this it's not your entire sequence I
thought it was I thought they were gonna
be Destin clones walking the streets but
if you do the math it's only point zero
two percent of your sequence that's a
game-changer they should like put that
on the website or something okay was at
this point that I was invited to an
education summit headquarters in
Mountain View California
my wife who's really smart when it comes
to genetics insisted that she take my
place for reasons I'll let her explain
as well as someone who's done genetic
research in the past and wouldn't know
if it would benefit you guys there were
if it would harm you guys so I'm here
this part is super cute to me because
she doesn't like to be on camera that
much but I asked her to vlog just a
little bit she went and talked to
professors and researchers from all over
the country and they discussed the
different benefits and risks of doing
this type of testing both on the
individual level and its overall
implications for society
the main thing she learned is that the
optional questions are the key when
people answer the question scientists
can start to figure out what genotypes
affect what traits we decided as a
family that we want to contribute to the
overall genetic body of knowledge
because that's going to help Society in
the future okay after you decide to spit
you were about to send your genetic
information off to a third party kind of
scary so a set up an email address
specifically to do the kid and it's
pretty interesting because there's no
return address so really the only
indicator for which tube is mine is this
14 digit code I spit in the tube you're
smart you can figure that part out and
you write down that 14 digit code on the
tube and link that to the email address
and that goes to 23andme headquarters
the kid however does not go to 23andme
headquarters it goes to lab core a
completely different company after doing
some research I discovered that 23andme
has isolated themselves physically from
the samples LabCorp has samples and
numbers 23andme has
email addresses and numbers I decided to
spit in this thing and then chase it out
to California to see what happens when
it hits the door of the lab this is the
first time lab cores allowed someone
like me into the lab with a camera I was
introduced to the lab manager Amanda
Douglas and was told I could film
anything and ask any question I wanted
yes institut national genetics institute
okay it's a subsidiary of okay no way is
that the FedEx guy that brings brings
the stuff in what's up man do you bring
all the samples here nice to meet you
man this is way more behind the scenes
it was gonna be with larger batches
there's really and so you open them any
oh he's actually get the sample okay so
what's your name in Lonnie Lonnie I'm
destiny I'm nice to meet you
all right so we got our spit in the
system now what let's go ahead and test
the ones that are ready to test so
they'll move on to the last is that
where we're going now sweet these are
all specimens here said Lonnie has done
his thing we come in here and we're
ready to extract the DNA okay oh this is
so rad
this is like from the future what are
you guys doing I'm currently uncapping
specimen sample but uh could be able to
put them into the can which will then
take a little small amount of it okay so
these machines are autonomously taking
the samples out of the specimen tube
that people mailed in and then it's
automatically putting those into the
96-well plate that's what we're doing
got it okay so this is the first time
where we no longer have humans touching
it and we're moving towards machine
automated process set it I would
high-five you but you get gloves on I
spent the entire day with Amanda
learning the whole process and basically
it works like this first they isolate
the DNA and then they amplify it by
allowing it to replicate and then the
magic happens this chip is the secret to
genotyping basically they take the DNA
and they unzip the double helix which
leaves you with one side of a ladder
rung they then put this unzipped DNA
onto the chip which has thousands of
artificial DNA probes on it these probes
are basically long stretches of DNA that
matched known parts of the human genome
so when a ladder comes along and gets
beside the probe it's a perfect match
and will bind to it since this stretch
of DNA is a known sequence you can then
read the next base pair that's hanging
off of the probe and that's the specific
information for that base pair they do
this by a fluorescent marker that
they'll put on the chips which reacts to
different kinds of light these specific
locations are chosen because they're
associated with something interesting
like a disease risk or a physical trait
this fancy machine illuminates the chips
and takes a picture which tells you what
letter you have at that particular DNA
snip or single nucleotide polymorphism
and that's it that's how the data is
captured the next thing I wanted to know
is what happens after your sample is
tested on the website you could choose
to allow lab core to keep the sample on
long-term storage for future testing or
you can check a box and tell them to
destroy it
I asked Amanda if she would show me this
because a lot of people want to know if
they check that box
it's actually gonna happen Amanda has
agreed to show me the process it's
really exciting I'm told oh yeah
excitement here so we take a box of 120
samples that we've scanned and said the
sample is to be discarded to the
customer does not want to store it
long-term so once they're ready to be
discarded we'll take the samples and
throw them in to the trash can we simply
toss them into the trash pour the whole
box that's it that's it and then what
happens to it like you I really expect
you that you're hiding the samples
somewhere right you're gonna do
something crazy with him right away
and they go and they are destroyed at a
biomedical waste facility that's right
so we're kind of goofing around here but
it is important so she showed me the
entire process the samples are
consolidated they're kept under lock and
key and they're picked up daily it's
legit so I am satisfied with the process
obviously 23andme knew I would be
satisfied or they wouldn't have allowed
me to do this but it was really fun too
anyway I really enjoyed the ancestry
data a lot more than I thought I would I
elected to talk to my dad about it we
had a really good discussion and we
actually learned things about our family
together the health stuff is interesting
though it is your responsibility to
understand what those results mean and
to get a better handle on this I decided
to go talk to dr. Lam again the unbiased
third party at HudsonAlpha I found the
information really fascinating it gave
me some insight into myself but I'm I
have a background in human genetics
that's my PhD so I got all the nuances I
understood what that means and what that
doesn't mean so so what you're saying is
even if someone does 23andme and they
get that information about their own
body it's important to go the next step
and understand what you're learning
about your body that's what you're
saying and to bring your medical doctor
into those conversations and to make
sure that your doctor understands the
nuances of genetics as well a piece of
information and you've got to make sure
you understand what that piece can and
can't tell you and in a lot of cases you
have the decision you can make the
decision do I want to even know this
information or do I want to not look at
that part of my report get it okay and
to be clear Neil has nothing to do with
that's correct okay so that's an
unbiased third-party opinion thank you
for that
my pleasure okay in summary I was
concerned about privacy I went to the
lab I am no longer concerned about
privacy they've got a good handle on
that you were concerned about the data
the benefits outweighing the risks do
you feel like it does I do feel like the
information is helpful for society as a
whole as well as the individual okay and
there's three things you said you wanted
to bring up I did why no one should
realize that just because report says
that you have a marker it doesn't mean
you're gonna get that means like you're
more or less likely to have that trait
number to only gather the information
that you think you can handle so if you
think hey I'm not sure I want to know
that then then wait some people only do
the ancestry thing because they don't
want to know those health risks right
and three you need to realize that it's
a family affair I mean once you find out
your data you're it's really your
family's data so you may have to make
decisions on whether you should share
that information with your mother and
father or brother and sister or whether
you shouldn't if this is something you
want to do you can go to 23andme dot-com
slash smarter get a tube spit in it send
it off and get your data back if you
want to do that feel free to if not no
big deal Thank You 223 me for actually
letting us more or less investigate
their company and being so transparent
that was pretty cool
nobody's ever gone into the lab like
that before you think it's a good thing
I think it's a fun thing yeah anyway I'm
Destin you getting smarter every day
it's my wife Tara that's it
have a good one bye no private or health
information about any individual was
recorded or shared in the making of this
video I am gonna try to vlog for the
first time
I'm not comfortable on camera so this
should be pretty interesting even in the
screen and it's not if I guess oh I keep
looking at the screen you are going to I
keep looking at the screen I'm not good
at this okay next